# Projects

Over the years I've worked on quite a few projects.  No two are ever the same, varying in technology, processes, domains, timescales, public visibility...  
Some solo, others collaborative.  
Some paid, others in the interest of learning.  
Here's a quick summary of some of these projects, dates are estimates.


## Electronic coursework mark submission (development)
##### 2015 – 2016

AQA hired a third party supplier to provide a new customer facing application suite for electronic coursework mark capture, this project was run in a waterfall fashion.  
When the time came for testing it soon became apparent that it was not fit for purpose without extensive rework, by which time the supplier was no longer available.  
As our internal Oracle APEX expert most of the front end development work fell to me.


## Enterprise service bus - proof of concept
##### 2016 – 2016

As part of a much wider business and technical strategy AQA has decided to implement an enterprise service bus. The aim is for the majority of system-to-system interfaces to flow through BizTalk, the proof of concept was limited to two data interchanges. The development team is split between internal staff and consultants from a partner organisation, split across two working sites.

My personal contributions included:
• Translating the corporate data model (CDM) into a set of canonical XML schemas aligned to business processes.
• Creating and curating a list of well-defined interchanges, defined by the source and target systems, canonical schema and specific datatype. This matrix provides support for estimation and scoping, progress tracking, facilitating communication, auditing of analysis work and ensures that we have a clear view of all interfaces so that omissions and inaccuracies can be corrected.
• Producing JSON schemas to define interfaces for use by current and future interchanges and providing sample files to help illustrate their use.
• Analysing target systems from a technical perspective to ensure that the data they are to receive is both correct and sufficient. The output here is in the form of attribute-level mapping spreadsheets.
• Analysing future interchanges at a higher level to contribute to the big picture view of how data flows through the organisation.

## Electronic coursework mark submission (performance testing)
##### 2015 – 2015

It was deemed essential to AQA that a new coursework mark capture solution was tested for performance before rollout, in order to verify the new server configurations, database load performance and end user experience. This turned out to be a worthwhile exercise as it highlighted a few critical issues which we were able to mitigate during testing. Resolving these issues was non-trivial and required collaboration across many technical disciplines; network, engineering, security, development, quality assurance.

I wrote the performance test scripts using Neoload automated performance testing tool based on functional specifications of the application. These test scripts are necessarily complex due to integration with code generated by a development framework (Oracle APEX). It was the unusual collection of required knowledge (APEX, JavaScript, regular expressions, HTTP) which brought this work to me, despite my previous lack of automation testing experience.

## Electronic marks processing
##### 2014 – 2015

The exam processing lifecycle has several key activities, processing marks for exams is among the most critical. In order to increase the percentage of scripts marked online it was decided to use an additional third party service provider. Integration with this provider's systems was via consumption of their SOAP webservices, using data managed with a suite of new Oracle Forms. My specific focus was around marks processing and in particular guaranteeing the performance of this interface. Early estimates were for up to 30 million marks in June 2015 with future expansion anticipated, there have been no performance issues two years later, actual numbers per year appear to be roughly half the original estimates.

## Item aggregation rules engine
##### 2014 – 2015

A typical exam paper has a set of rubrics (rules) which allow or disallow certain combinations of questions/ items to be counted together. These rubrics can be quite complex and independent of the question paper's ragged hierarchical structure. The development was threefold:
• new forms to maintain human-readable rubrics and convert to rule sets for processing
• new background processes to apply rules to item marks dataset to produce aggregated marks
• transfer of aggregated marks to existing systems for standardisation, grading and result delivery

Performance testing results for 3 million item marks:
• Process XML and store in database tables ~ 6 hours
• Perform aggregation < 1 hour
• Update grading application with aggregated marks ~ 2 hours
• Transfer item marks to results reporting application via db link ~ 4 minutes

## Subversion rollout
##### 2014 – 2015

Software version control was previously managed independently and inconsistently for each system at AQA. To improve efficiency and and reduce onboarding overheads we introduced a new Subversion suite of repositories, replacing both PVCS and bespoke systems. I designed a consistent structure for these repositories which covers database SQL scripts and system files. This structure was carefully balanced for usability and automating deployments.

## Automated build generation tool
##### 2014

Software deployments at AQA had become quite a time consuming process and prone to error due to their manual nature. Designed in conjunction with the Subversion rollout and influencing its repository structure I built a web based SVN build tool to automate builds. Software releases are still manual, but now involve executing a single line command, this approach ensures that only authenticated users can action the deployment.

The SVN build tool is written in the Go programming language (www.golang.org) and runs as a web application. Database scripts are combined into a single script with deployment logging added, provided for download. Operating system builds are 2-step; transfer builds to the remote server via secure copy (scp) and provide details of the commands required to perform the release. The actual release mechanism is written in the server's native language; Linux shell scripts or VMS DCL.

## APEX application architecture - authentication
##### 2012 – 2013

Development of an LDAP based replacement authentication scheme for Oracle Application Express applications. Designed to reduce IT administration effort and improve usability for as long as Oracle remains the company's database platform of choice, simplifying the login process for end users by reusing Windows credentials.

Implemented as a PL/SQL package built on top of Oracle packages dbms_ldap (to validate user credentials) and apex_custom_auth (to facilitate the login to APEX). All other applications subscribe to this authentication scheme.

## APEX application architecture - authorisation service
##### 2012 – 2013

Development of a replacement security model for APEX applications. Designed to address inadequacies with the existing security model, reduce IT administration effort and improve usability for as long as Oracle remains the company's database platform of choice.

• Developer API, called when deploying an application:
- register applications.
- create defined "application roles", representing a set of functionality within the application.
• Access control portal (APEX web application), accessed by application super users:
- maintain "user groups" by application.
- link user groups to application roles.
- assign users to user groups.

This process is all data driven and most importantly does not require the involvement of IT staff.
Fine-grained access (row level security) is provided using a PL/SQL package which relies on Oracle package dbms_rls to apply a pre-defined policy to tables meeting certain criteria. This uses Oracle's data dictionary to reduce development overhead.

## APEX application architecture - common code
##### 2012 – 2013

Development of a suite of common services to support future application development. Designed to reduce development effort, improve application auditing and to help enforce development standards, for as long as Oracle remains the company's database platform of choice.

Each service exists in the form of a PL/SQL package written to agreed standards for naming and access, services include:
• Email - a wrapper on Oracle package apex_mail which works even outside an APEX session.
• File Transfer - externally sourced package built on top of Oracle packages utl_file and utl_tcp.
• Session locking - a simple wrapper on Oracle SYS package to reduce awkward SYS grants.
• Logging - Instrumentation package utilising Oracle packages dbms_application_info and dbms_utility. Enables simple and consistent debugging and error logging across applications.

Using these common packages improves consistency across applications and indeed developers. Logging in particular helps throughout the entire systems development life cycle (SDLC):
• Developers can debug code during unit testing and can prove that this step took place.
• Testers can narrow down the cause of defects thus reducing time taken to correct.
• DBAs can use it to identify particular bottlenecks and cross-reference with resource usage reports.
• Systems administrators can quickly identify the cause of production issues.

## APEX application architecture - development framework
##### 2012 – 2013

Evolution of the company's existing Oracle development standards documentation, driven partly by enhancements to Application Express itself. Designed to streamline the entire application development life-cycle, improve application quality and consistency and ultimately ensure that the overall system is truly enterprise class, for as long as Oracle remains the company's database platform of choice.

A suite of concise, targeted, formal, version-controlled documents covering standards for each element of the Application Express environment, including:
• server directory structure
• database link standards for efficient distributed queries
• code commenting and instrumentation
• use of Shared Components vs Page Components
• use of custom HTML, CSS and JavaScript
• use of common (business non-specific) code
• version control and deployment

## APEX application architecture - theme
##### 2012 – 2013

Development of a replacement APEX theme, designed to improve the look, feel and usability of applications and insulate them against future changes for as long as Oracle remains the company's database platform of choice. Cross-browser compatible, W3C standards-compliant and mobile-friendly, polyfills and unobtrusive JavaScript are used to support older browsers.

Some benefits include:
• Mobile use enabled without further development work.
• Reduced development complexity and enforced adherence to a common standard.
• Reduced development time for re-skin.
• Reduced regression testing time after re-skin compared with the adoption of a new theme.
• Faster loading times due to fewer images and use of newer features.

## Management information data warehouse
##### 2012 – 2013

The introduction of a new data warehouse to cover all current and future reporting requirements. This project was run in an agile way and followed the Kimball approach in order to deliver business benefit as early as possible.

My personal contributions:
• Defining the application architecture of the Oracle 11g data warehouse.
- naming conventions and logical organisation of objects.
- design patterns and definition of development standards.
- partitioning and indexing strategies.
- tools to enforce the above using the data dictionary to generate and validate DDL.
• Creating a metadata-driven ETL control framework in PL/SQL.
• Dimensional modelling using Embarcadero ER Studio Data Architect.
• Curating the enterprise bus matrix.
• Analysis of master data sources and documentation of data lineage.
• Rationalisation of source data, translation into measures suitable for flexible and consistent reporting.
• Writing and performance tuning extraction queries.
• Implementing ETL routines following specific design patterns for different entity types:
- conformed, single-use and junk dimensions.
- slowly-changing dimensions with combinations of type 0, 1 and 2 attributes.
- fact tables at the lowest (transactional) grain as well as from pre-aggregated sources.
- aggregated snapshots of fact tables to provide point-in-time analysis not available at source.
• Mapping these entities using OBIEE to provide a logical business layer and presentation layer for users.
• Developing reports in Answers web interface for demonstration and proof of concept.
• Code review and consultation.
• Defining the version control and deployment strategy for the data warehouse.

## Customer profile reporting application
##### 2012

Customer information at AQA was previously limited to contact and address information and distributed by a desktop application. To improve upon this reporting I introduced a new web application built in Oracle APEX, effectively a data mart of customer information. Fed in part by a PL/SQL ETL process, in part by distributed queries providing order and invoice data and in part by the external table load of third party statistics. Additionally served to prove some assertions made within the new application development framework.

## Event management web application
##### 2011

When organising a training event you might expect to know in advance the venue, a rough number of attendees, the presenter(s) and the timing. In this case only the topic is known in advance, everything else is configured through flexible end-to-end workflow, from conception to invoicing.

The event maintenance application itself is a simple web application built using Oracle APEX. I provided a set of flexible, tokenised email templates which would handle all combinations of event, presenter, timing, venue details as well as the attachment of documents specific to the event. Integration with finance reused an existing CSV flat file interface and the email solution was pure PL/SQL.

## Finance module enhancements
##### 2011

This project involved improving existing functionality of the Oracle e-Business suite's AR/AP modules. I was involved in creating XML Publisher reports to replace existing JetForm statements, invoices and remittance advice.

## Human resources module reimplementation
##### 2011

This project called for enhancements to Oracle e-Business suite's HR module. A collaborative effort between internal staff and external suppliers. I was personally responsible for:
• creating XML Publisher letters, integrated using WebADI
• creating bespoke Alerts to underpin sickness, onboarding and leaving processes
• enhancing a bespoke Discoverer data model to provide improved HR management information.

## Management information data warehouse pilot
##### 2011

A third party led, IT funded project intending to provide a sparse but complete data warehouse solution. OBIEE 10g was used for the business/ reporting layer. Oracle Warehouse Building (OWB) was used for generating ETL scripts, which were controlled by a custom Oracle 10g PL/SQL framework. My role was analytical; highlighting issues and proposing suitable solutions.

## Survey feedback reporting application
##### 2011

Feedback for a particular class of training events at AQA is captured by a third party, aggregated and returned for processing. I agreed the specific XML format for this feedback and wrote a parsing program for it using PL/SQL. This is manually uploaded by the users, data can be edited where appropriate and then it is used to generate attractive graphical summaries. These graphs are generated using XSLT and the BI Beans Graph DTD in Oracle BI Publisher.

## Teacher malpractice web application
##### 2010

The examination process, like any other, is vulnerable to abuse. Those accused of such actions are subject to legal proceedings and may be excluded from otherwise engaging with the company. This project provided a secure web-based maintenance form for holding this sensitive data, as well as deep integration with the recruitment system to give masked warnings to users without knowledge of the legal proceedings.

## Job monitoring web application
##### 2009

Oracle dbms scheduler, e-Business suite's concurrent manager and Quartz scheduler in BI Publisher all provide data about batch process execution and scheduling. This project's sole requirement was consistent reporting across the different batch processes. I provided a new APEX application built upon ETL routines which were themselves reported on.

## Recruitment web application
##### 2008

Recruitment and retention of external human resources is of great significance to an organisation such as AQA which has high resource demands for short periods of time. This project involved replacing a user-maintained software package with a supported solution and improving integration with other systems. This was delivered in an agile fashion, leveraging the benefits of good working relationships with end users.

Oracle APEX served as the web interface and BI Publisher provided pixel-perfect reporting, replacing Microsoft Access and mail merge in Word. Upstream and downstream data interfaces were provided using database links.
